Thanks, the governance and administrative party.
Um, we are interested to speak to you today
and we'll for 45 minutes.
So, uh, we will give you opportunity
to make some opening comments,
but if you could just maybe introduce yourselves,
introduce the team, and if any, um, other colleagues want
to come up to the table, you're more than welcome.
Uh, but we just please ask that you just introduce yourself.
Um, and, uh, so just so we know
who's, uh, speaking for the record.
And we will give you opportunity to,
to make some opening comments now,
and then we'll move to questions from you. So, hope
To you thank you very much, and we, we appreciate the time
and we understand time is important.
So, um, I'll keep my comments brief.
Um, my name is Ravi Jaan.
I'm the chair of, uh, Tam, ROI,
the Water Services Authority.
I've got, uh, Alan Pregno here, who's the CEO,
and he will introduce the risk of his team.
Um, the organization is very new.
It's only established a few years ago,
and its first task was
to get the drinking water regulations in place,
but with the local water done well, legislation, suite
of legislation last year.
Our role has changed.
We've got more a leadership role now with some oversight
in addition to drinking water of stormwater and wastewater.
Uh, but with those comments, ask to Alan.
Thanks Ravi, and thanks for the opportunity,
um, this morning.
Just wanna introduce the team here.
So we've got, um, we've got Steve, who is head of operations
and, uh, with, uh, with accountability
and responsibility over the drinking water system primarily,
uh, and the frontline offices.
And, and we've got Sarah who, uh, is, uh, head
of strategy and performance
and is picking up quite a lot of the new tools
and responsibilities out of local water done well,
reforms like standardization of infrastructure
and the, the, the tools that we use, uh, as a regulator
and behind me, um, I've got, uh, Sarah, who, uh, is head
of our external relations area.
And of course, uh, everyone drinks water.
Uh, and so we have a lot of, uh,
relationships across the country
and very many diverse communities to, to serve.
Uh, Bevin here is our CFO.
Um, and, uh, about two weeks into the role, I think, uh,
Yasin who's joined us from, uh,
she's our new general counsel, um, reading up on our, uh,
updated legislation.
So, um, uh, everyone's pleased to be here.
We'll just draw on people as we need
and we can, um, turn to opening remarks if you are.
Absolutely. Yeah. Good to go. Yep.
Yeah, so look, won't dwell too long.
I think that, uh, picking up point ravine made,
we were stood up, uh, uh, four
and a bit years ago, uh, in the way
that Havelock North Contamination event to, to do a job.
And that was really to, um, uh, to
give confidence to households
and communities that their water is safe to drink.
And so, you know, I'm really pleased that,
that we have been able to make huge headway into that job.
So around about three quarters of a million Kiwis, uh,
were drinking water from public supplies
that did not have the basic treatment and, and,
and barriers in place.
We saw in Queenstown a few, uh, a couple of years back,
the crypto security outbreak.
What happens if you don't?
Um, and, and the team's focused on,
on getting that number down.
So we're now under 300,000 people, um,
uh, with that number.
So we're well over halfway, and we would anticipate getting
that down to zero within the next, uh, 12 to 18 months.
There's still more work to do
after that, of course, just making sure those, uh,
things continue to work.
And we've got issues with resilience that we know about, uh,
where, where, um, uh, treatment plan gets taken out, what,
what happens next.
But really the focus for us now broadens out
as an organization into, uh, the water infrastructure,
water services space more generally.
The, the reforms, uh, are set, the legislation is in place,
and so we are looking to prioritize, uh,
introducing the tools that will support an effective
and efficient system.
So, uh, late last year, um, uh, uh, Sarah let the, the work
with industry to set first ever, uh,
national waste border standards.
So they will replace existing, uh, resource consents
as they expire, and,
and people will move to a standard of discharge
that meets public health and environmental norms, uh,
and doesn't, uh, uh,
doesn't overco it, doesn't undercook it.
And, and will get to a, um, a far more efficient system,
probably strip of nearly a billion dollars, uh, about 800,
uh, million, uh, to a billion out
of just the consenting process alone.
And of course, there is the
standardization of infrastructure.
So there are more tools for us to build, uh,
engineering design standards and so on.
So we, we look forward to working with operators, suppliers,
industry o on, on how we can standardize infrastructure
and strip some cost out while, uh,
fixing the infrastructure we know needs work.
Thank you so much. We do have some
questions from, uh, members.
So we'll start with Andy, then Tanya, and
Good to see you. You
too. Um, that's the first place I wanted
to start is the consenting area.
It's just the standards that have been applied,
the sense of those standards.
Can you just give us a little bit of a spell out of
how bad different to where they were?
Mm-hmm. And, um, you talked about that saving,
and I counsels the complaint.
To me, the cost of consenting mm-hmm.
Um, was gonna be more than the cost of the plan was. Yeah.
Um, which, you know,
gets the full standard completely nothing standards.
Mm-hmm. Um, but can you spell that out
and what that looks like, and,
and maybe give us some illustrations of where
the savings potentially
for some communities will be missing. Yeah.
So look, in a general, uh, in a, in an overview sense,
we have about 320, um, public, uh,
waste water treatment plants operated by councils.
And shortly a number of water entities across the country.
There has been a, um, uh, a backing up of, uh,
expired consents for some time now.
And, and you know, about a third
of those plants are operating on expired consent, some
of 'em as long as 20 years.
So, so that's a pretty big indicator that there's a problem.
And, and when recon consenting is happening,
it's not being built a a And I think some of the reason for
that is by the time you get to the other side
of the consenting process, the cost
for the community is rejected.
And so, one, one of the things we look to do with, uh,
stand, uh, national standard for wastewater is look at
what is the public health, um, bar that you need to treat
for so that people don't get sick when it's discharged?
What is the, uh, the reasonable investment in,
in mitigating the environmental impact of
discharging into the environment, whether it's land, uh,
fresh water or sea.
And, and so we used the best technical experts we could in
the industry to answer those questions and,
and standardize it.
But the way that we'll move from the old system,
which is case by case and in fact not really enforced
and monitored very well
and not working, is when your consent lapses, you apply, uh,
uh, for a new consent, uh, with the standard that you,
um, that is applicable.
So if you're discharging into fresh water,
there's a fresh water standard depending on type
of freshwater if you are to see or to land.
And if you, if your application meets the standard,
the regional council, the consenting authority
must issue a consent.
And, and, and that consent will be, uh, 30
or 30, 35 years, 35 year duration.
So there's some certainty of investment for the operator
and the rate payers paying for it.
So you'll go to a much more certain,
and you know, what you have to apply for
where it's currently until you're on the other side
of the consent process, you
Don't, so you're confident that when you go for, you say,
look, this will meet the standard.
That's the standard which required
for effectively you almost activity.
That's right. That's right. Okay.
That, that's very helpful. Second question is, can you just,
um, talk us through the, um, issues
around the size of the jurisdiction?
You've got, uh, originally I think under three waters
that went right down to about two houses, something like
that, uh, at one stage.
Yeah. Um, so you're referring to drinking primarily? Yeah.
So what, what stage of community
That's right.
Do you go to, yeah. So, so, um, the, uh, the
drinking water regime was amended last year to,
to change the threshold of supplies
that would come under regulation.
Um, we, we are still, uh, we have a period of transition
for supplies to come on board into the regime.
So initially about 2000 supplies that were on the register
with Ministry of Health transitioned over to us
that included all of the council supplies,
that service about 85% of the country, um, and a
and a number of small private community supplies
that probably had accessed the subsidy back in the day.
And, and he, and hence were on the register, um, we,
we have, uh, a number of small supplies that must register
by 2028 and comply by 2030.
Uh, but the, um, the supplies
that service very small communities up to, uh, 25, uh,
people, uh, are not required to register.
Um, and so that's, uh,
off often arrangements between neighbors.
You might have something in a farming, uh, area, um, uh,
but like those communities, we can still support
with guidance and information.
Um, but they are not required, um,
to come in under the regime.
Phil, thank you. Yeah. Thank you. Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair, thank you for, for your time.
Um, you talk about confident providing confidence
to households, uh, for water services.
Um, people in Wellington at the moment will have some
concerns about whether that's, uh, the case or not.
Uh, and clearly there's a transitional phase at the moment,
but what is the extent of involvement
for the regulator right here, right now,
and what is, uh, unfolding here locally? Yeah,
So our role in waste
and storm, I would categorize it as a, um, oversight
of the system of, um, wastewater and stormwater services.
Is, is it working as a system.
Um, and so in relation to my point, uh,
which has been playing out over the last week
or so, our, our interest is, is not necessarily a direct one
that's for, um, Wellington Water
and then Greater Wellington as, as the, uh,
frontline regulator.
And they issue the consent for that discharge and,
and they're required to monitor the performance of the plant
and type enforcement action is, uh, perhaps is underway.
So, uh, our role is, is to look at the system,
and that includes the regulators and,
and look at, um, whether they are doing the
job, uh, meant to do.
We also have a couple of direct tools
to support the performance of the system.
So standards I mentioned
before, we can set the standards that can help
that system perform.
That will actually give us, um,
that strips out a large amount of, um, uh,
consent conditions that currently operate.
You can have up to a hundred of them.
They're usually ignored.
They're not monitored and not necessarily reported on.
We'll have the key metrics only
and they'll be nationally consistent.
So I think we'll get more transparency
for the public and community.
As a result, we get more consistency in enforcement
and monitoring practices as a result.
We can also set targets.
So, uh, uh,
right now the bit the public usually sees is when wastewater
is, uh, overflows.
So it might come into a beach, uh, in Auckland and summer,
or it might overflow, uh, in the network.
And, uh, that will happen.
Uh, what we want to do though,
is bring it in into the light.
'cause half of the country's overflow networks are not con
uh, overflows are not consented at all.
They're pretended to not happen.
Uh, so everyone will be required to consent overflows they,
and report on to the public.
So transparency and targets.
And, and third, thirdly, we have the ability to
authorize or license the credentials of the workforce
that operate the treatment plants and work on the network.
Is that, And that's across,
That's across retrospectively consent.
'cause some of these events happen before, that's right.
Before they, like, by accident. So how could you consent
That? So these are new, these
are new tools.
So in the overflow space, uh,
that standard got issued last year, and so you could talk
To them. Yeah. So
at the moment, about half of, so some, uh,
regions have consents in place
to allow a certain number of overflows.
Yeah. So, uh, because they happen obviously.
And so, and then they will have a management plan about
how you try and reduce the risk
and what you do when you have an overflow.
And in some places they're prohibited,
which means they're completely invisible.
So we have no reporting of them.
The public is unlikely to get notifications.
So what we are putting in place is requirement
that everyone has consenting and everyone is reporting
and notifying the public.
Mm-hmm. Um, which will be a real change.
So the bar is quite low at the moment.
So this is the first step.
And then we could look at what else we can do in the future.
Yeah. What we're looking to do is have operators, um,
get the, get the overflow happening in a place
that's best on the network
and not, not somewhere
where you shouldn't have the overflow happening.
And, and, and so I I stop that. We could, yeah. Yes. Great.
It'll, it'll rain. We'll
Just, um, we'll just, we'll just, uh, go to tangy
and he'll finish his question, and then we've gotta start
from Tim, and then we'll go to Tam. Some primary reason.
Yeah. Thanks. So just if I can move to sort
of affordability and household costs sort of issues,
which is, um, pretty rife at the moment.
Have, have you done any sort of analysis
of the likely impact on, uh, household bills when it comes
to quarter costs as a result of the government's reforms?
And I guess particularly in areas where there might be, um,
smaller communities
or limited, uh, economies of scale compared to
what was previously, uh, proposed?
Yeah, so, so our, our legislation is premised and on
and requires of us, uh, a proportionate risk-based, uh,
approach to regulation.
So, um, you know, that recognizes that big, um, urban areas
and cities with large populations have a different risk
profile if, if contamination comes in than, uh,
small rural communities.
We put, as a result of that, direct result of that, uh, we,
we put quite a lot of work over the last 18 months into how,
how do you treat water safely in, uh,
particularly rural communities
and in small supplies where the economics
of a central treatment plant for a small number
of rate payers and customers are ugly.
Uh, a very high cost.
And so we, uh, as a result of that, we have issued, uh,
a number of what are called acceptable solutions, uh,
for a technology called endpoint treatment, where,
where those communities can have treated water at the site
of their house with a unit that's a little bit like a, a a,
a gas run cylinder, if you like, attached to the house.
Um, and, and the economics of that are, are comparable
to those in an urban area, um, the central treatment plant,
and a large number of customers.
So that's an example of, uh, we, we are aware that cost
and affordability are, are real and,
and that, uh, different circumstances, um,
can warrant a different response and technology
Have, have you got though any information on expected
ranges as to what that would look like?
I get the point you're making about comparability
between small, rural, rural communities and urban ones,
but I'm more interested in the costs
implications for households.
So If I may, I think it's a very good point.
So as an approach, what we are relying heavily on
as a regulator, we'll be putting regulations in place,
but at the same time, we are also pushing
for standardization.
So we are saying if the standardization certainty,
the cost should come down.
Um, so we are pushing for standardization,
and as Alan just mentioned, the wastewater, um,
discharge tenders from treatment plants
is gonna reduce costs when we put standards for wastewater
engineering design standards, which we are working on next.
So the next thing the organization will release over the
next 12 to 18 months would be, uh, design standards
for stormwater water supply and wastewater.
So that right across the country, there's only one set of,
uh, design standards.
At the moment. Every local government has got
their own standards.
So developers and contractors have to, um,
get themselves geared up for all these varying standards.
So standardization should reduce cost, uh,
it should reduce design cost,
it should reduce procurement cost,
it should reduce operating and maintenance costs.
So we have some of these other initiatives underway
to make sure we give effect
to this proportionality that we talk about.
But do you hold any advice
or modeling on the actual projected quantums?
I get you as a response,
but I'm talking about the actual raw figures
that households will face as a result of
This change. So, so,
um, tho as a system, no, that, that,
that information's more likely to sit with, uh, department
of Internal Affairs firstly,
and then as they come on board the commerce commission,
which is looking at the asset health condition. Yeah.
You supplementary from the term.
Yeah. And apologize, going back a couple of questions.
When, um, uh, Mr.
Iki was just asking about, you know, current situation,
Wellington, and the, and the role you can take to you,
I guess if you think back a couple of years,
and if you can see that the train is starting
to go off the rails, like when councils are deciding
to push money into cycle lanes instead of, um, wastewater
Treatment, that's incorrect.
That is completely incorrect.
And it was put in the post today that
that's a false correlation
Start. It's a false correlation.
It's been published.
Um, okay. The lady off protest too much, I think,
but, um, when, when council
Make million and tam more point at that meeting,
by the way, before
Council meeting. Yeah, Melissa,
so I just anticipating this,
I think we'll just stick to questions.
Do you have a question for to, to Wai and We'll, um,
I haven't even mentioned, okay,
Ms. Paul being on council at
The time. Okay. But yet we, we, we
are intelligent
enough to realize your application.
So just a direct, a direct question to Okay.
Just order everyone, let's stick.
Tim can ask a question to can answer, then we'll come
to you, uh, team for your promise.
Thank you. Sorry.
So when you can see,
or if you can see that, that it's, that I think
what I said was trains going off the rails
or it's, it's getting off track
that the money's not going there
and that you can see the inevitable was going to happen.
Do you have a role in that? Can you intervene in this case?
Could you have intervened?
Or do you just have to sit back and watch that happen? So
We, we don't have, uh, the, the role or,
or powers to intervene in a, in a,
in a wastewater treatment plants, uh,
performance, uh, directly.
That is the, the role of the regional council
up and down the country.
And, and as I indicated earlier, that's quite variable, um,
historically, and we hope standards and, and, and,
and some of the setup, uh,
that we've got going forward will improve the situation.
What what we are looking for though is systemic things.
So if there are, I mean, we don't know.
We'll wait and see what what comes out of, uh,
looking into the mower point situation in days
to come, weeks to come.
But we are aware that there are some systemic issues, uh,
with, with waste water across the country that,
that go across operators.
And so, uh, one of those is the, the, the pipes
that serve, uh, wastewater treatment of plants and,
and in fact in drinking water as well, collectively,
that's about 80% of the whole three waters asset.
So, so when you talk about cost
and what is the cost to come, a lot of it is sitting there
and it's underground and difficult to know
what condition it's in.
And, and, uh,
while councils are pretty good knowing the condition
of drinking water pipes for obvious reasons, uh,
the information base on, on wastewater reticulation is,
uh, poorer and, and often unknown.
And, and so that's a system concern
that we have been highlighting
and we're really looking forward
to the Commerce Commission standing up its role, which is
to, to collect information on the condition of the asset,
the investment going in the sufficiency of that investment
and, and the efficiency of that investment.
So yes, we, we have a role
and with that role we can, um, advise
and we can make recommendations a,
about issues we see in the system.
So if you see the next one
Happening, yes, We, uh, that's right.
If we see the next one happening
and we've got the system set up,
and remember, this is a fairly new role for us.
So we have to set up a, a way
to monitor whether the system's forming as it's expected,
which is what we are, um, doing now.
We would hope to, to get an early warning sign if,
if we had, could get one.
And then we can act and advise and recommend. That's right.
So you've got a frontline regulator there to do its job.
You've got an operator there to do its job.
If that's failing, that's
where our responsibility. But is it
Just, Okay, that's a separate, yeah.
Yeah. So one question I'll come
back to you for primary if you wanna
No, no, it's, it's just, just on the final question.
Yeah. But, but in terms of, like you said, you can advise
and recommend in terms of the teeth, can you, can you
reach in, you can't actually say, well, look, you, you need
to stop channeling money, this other stuff,
you actually need to invest in this.
'cause we can see that that's about to create a massive
leak into an ocean that you, you refer to beaches in
Auckland in drinking water.
We can, we've got record of tools, uh, yeah.
In, in regards to waste and stormwater.
No, we don't at this point have those tools.
Thank you. That's actually leads perfectly
Onto my questions because, um,
although, so obviously Veolia operate all four
of the wastewater treatment plants in Wellington,
but they also operate plants across the country,
including in Queenstown, where they have also been, um,
spilling sewage into, into there as well.
So is it only on regional councils when there is a
nationwide problem with this French multinational company
who is, um, polluting our environment without reprimand?
Who, who, what tools would you need to fully hold them
to account given that the scale is nationwide?
Yeah, so just to talk to the, to the,
the point about regional councils are making isn't
that it's all on all all on them per se.
It, it's to, to clarify their role as the,
as the frontline environmental
regulator of those discharges.
And it's their responsibility to monitor them
and take action if they need to.
Um, it, it, you are right about Veolia.
And we also have, uh, city care, uh, which is owned
by Christchurch City Council as a another major provider,
for example, uh, uh, of similar services across the country.
So the key point probably to be made on that front is
whatever model you use and, and,
and contracting, uh, uh, expertise is, is, uh, is absolutely
fine and relatively common practice here and overseas.
You, you need to be able to, uh, manage that contract
and the relationship and the, and the expectations
and accountabilities with a contracted party.
Well, and,
and so, um, I, I don't have a comment to make on, on Veolia
specifically at all,
but I would say, uh, whatever model you're using, you need
to have the capability to, to, to utilize that,
that mechanism and manage the oversight of it. Mm.
Because what I, I would just, sorry, add to, I think the,
the core to your question,
and I think the earlier question is, well, what is our role?
And o the overriding role is that we provide leadership
to the industry, that we give trust
and confidence to the consumers
that their water supply is safe to drink,
and that we are looking after the environment from
which the water is taken.
And, and therefore, even though we may not have the direct,
uh, teeth, so to speak, I believe it is our role
to monitor, to identify, and then to influence
and push the other agencies failing, which to bring that
to the attention of the minister that we have these issues.
And that is exactly what we have been doing in recent times
when there were overflows in Mai in Auckland, uh,
we were in contact with the minister
and saying to the minister, we don't have the powers,
but other agencies do.
And if they're not, um, lifting their game, you know,
we made it known and other agencies did lift their game,
including Auckland Council, which was the first regulator
and then the EPA.
Mm-hmm. So to answer your question, I would say that,
uh, Tamar, ROI, water Services Authority has that role.
We will, uh, lift our gain. These are early days.
We've been focusing on drinking water,
we are focusing on wastewater.
Um, we will make it our business
to improve the water industry in New Zealand.
And I, sorry, I just have two, um,
follow up and I'll put them together.
So maybe you can answer them both in the same answer.
The first is, um,
when obviously there is a restructure
of local government being explored at the moment
with the possibility that we won't
have regional council soon.
So what thinking is Toma UA doing towards who will take
that role on afterwards?
And my second question is, uh, you made a comment about, um,
not being popular to the public to invest
or, um, that sometimes things like water, uh,
don't get the funding that they need
because they're not the kind of, I'm guessing
what you meant is that they're not the bright, shiny things
that people will see immediately or see at all.
Um, maybe if that's what you meant is that
I I you might be referring to my point that that, um,
you know, 8% of the, the assets that's under the ground, um,
hit hidden from view,
and we don't necessarily know what conditions it's in.
I, I don't think, uh,
That's okay then. If that's
how you're coming, that's fine. We'll leave that.
Um, what I wanna know is, um, we,
on Wellington City Council,
we gave 208 million in the long term plan
to the more point treatment, um, center
that is failing currently.
Do you know what, let's not go there, but we'll come to you
after, after us, we'll, we'll come to you.
What is going wrong in the pipeline
where there is money being allocated by councils?
Where is it going wrong?
And that there's still these failures happening despite
there being in invest more investment
than previous councils.
We can agree on that. We, we, what's go,
where's it going wrong in the pipeline?
Who's not delivering? Where are the problems happening?
So, so, so that's, you know, one
of the really encouraging things from the,
the last few years and the reforms that we have now got
is agencies charged with answering, uh, that question.
And we've also got responsibilities
and disciplines on the owners
and operators of water services to, to, to be able to, um,
account, uh, for the use of the money as well.
So prior to that, um, we, we probably didn't have the level
of information and, and scrutiny, uh, on these services.
It's a big asset. Um, it's an important asset that we need.
So Commerce Commission is standing up, uh, and,
and they are going to be collecting the information on the
investment and,
and, uh, comparing how much it costs, uh,
to operate these services, uh, across the country.
And, and, and looking at the efficiency of that spend
and whether, uh, it's going on the right stuff.
Uh, there's a requirement to ring fence money now raised
for water services that, uh,
they must be spent on water services, not on other things.
And, and, and that's a change as well.
So I think we're getting some of the fundamentals in place,
and, and as the information gets better, we we'll know
what the size of the challenge is and,
and, uh, you know, how long it'll take communities to
Get there. And, and
the regional council
Question and the regional council question.
So, uh, aware of, uh, the proposals out there, uh,
for changes, uh, there, that there, there will need to be,
uh, a, a set of responsibilities carried out
for environmental, um, uh, regulation management
that's been carried out through the RMA reforms.
There's legislation in the house at the moment, and,
and we work, uh, generally with the Department
of Internal Affairs, uh, and,
and ministry for the environment, um,
to support their advice functions.
We go through that. Uh, it, it, it's unique in
that we have 16 regional councils.
And, and so, um, uh, you know, the coordination of that is,
is, um, something we look forward to,
But the conversation has been taken.
Alan is talking to other agencies, um, our concern
that the poacher
and the gatekeeper can't be the same organization. Mm.
Yeah. Yep. Thank you Andy.
Yeah, I, I think Tam you were talking about the slice
treatment piece, which is slightly different.
Nevermind. Um, the question I've got is just, um,
you just mentioned gatekeepers.
Mm. So we've got four gatekeepers as far as I can see.
We've got the audit office, which is currently doing the
job, saying, well, you all under invest across the board
to councils, and they're not doing anything about that.
Um, but you guys, we've got regional councils,
so we've got commerce commission,
the way in which you all work together, talk together, um,
seems to be really, uh, report.
And also, who do you all report to?
'cause you said you raised your issues with a minister.
Mm-hmm. Are you got different agencies also reporting
potentially to different ministers?
Are we getting one picture from collection
because you all talking with each other, uh,
and the ministers go, yeah, okay.
We, we've all got that picture.
Or we getting a different ministers potentially.
This is, it was obviously early days, some
of it been set up, but
It's, it's a, uh, it's an interesting question in the
sense that, you know, uh, with, with the reforms done
and the legislation, um, now complete, the,
the system collectively of oversight
is gonna be really important to improving things from here.
Uh, um, the Commerce Commission has a responsible minister,
uh, uh, under, under each government, as do we.
Um, but the historically, uh, often not the same.
Uh, but, um, that, that's, that's, uh,
quite a common feature.
And regional councils, of course,
you currently have the elected representatives of those.
What, what we have been doing, uh, with this, the,
the signaled introduction of economic regulation
for some years now, uh, we've been working regularly
with the Congress commission.
Uh, we have a joint chairs, we have a joint CS meeting,
and the staff meet on a, on a regular basis
because we are very keen to make sure
that we are collecting the right information once, uh,
and, and, and not adding, uh, cost burden,
unnecessary cost burden to the system.
We're also very keen that the signals coming out
of the regulators are aligned, coordinated, and sensible.
And we're focusing on the right stuff.
You're Coordinating. We are.
It's a work in progress, obviously.
Uh, and, and, and for regional councils, they've,
they've got a bit on their plate right now,
and this is only a part of their work.
Um, uh, but we regularly engage with that forum as well.
And so, so you coordinator your end is a question
of whether we coordinate with our, I I make the observation,
Madam Chair, is that Commerce Commission reports
to completely different, uh, different select
and d for example, as well as
to different ministers than do, you know, do you,
and, you know, transport, we have the same issue
with Commerce Commissioner over a
number, number of other areas.
It something which probably ought to, ought to say,
we actually quite like to talk to them.
Um, just the, the other question I wanted
to ask is just in terms of the, the going forward, um,
we will see a lot of these water entities being set up well
operating and starting sending out bills, um, very shortly.
Mm-hmm. Um, what are you seeing from that?
And is that regulation, I know it's not your
business per se, it's more commerce commission,
but it makes sure that they are, are operating
with right levels, um, not legal,
because some of the numbers that should be thrown around,
are you, you mentioned affordability,
people look at those suggested afford bills go,
we can't do that.
Um, and, and also the other part of that, of course, is how
that relates to, so again, it's not your business,
but there's a, something which the oversight
of the system needs to be looking at is how that relates to
what councils do reduce the costs with the increase in
or separation water costs.
All all of those factors matter.
So we, we don't regulate in the bubble.
Um, and, and, and, you know, all
of those factors are coming into play,
and it is our responsibility, I, I believe, to engage early,
which is what we are doing with those
water entities as they're being stood up.
So, so just straight up to this, I'm talking to the, the CES
that have been appointed into those entities,
and shortly we will be engaging with the boards
that are being appointed to oversee them to,
to introduce ourselves, uh, to give them some, uh,
information and,
and an ongoing, um, contact if, if you like, uh, uh,
to clarify the, the regulatory regime
that we operate our role, um,
and as distinct from others, uh,
where they sit at the moment in terms
of their drinking water safety, for example,
and where they need to be focusing on.
Because for those board members coming on board,
they've got quite strong liabilities and responsibilities.
And I think giving them a clear picture of
how the regulators are seeing it and their,
and our priorities, uh, is important.
So getting in early as they get their feet under the table
and grip up the job and think about what plans
to put in place is, is very important in, in my view.
And look, can I ask one other question,
which is rather go back to the
consenting issue with waste order.
Um, getting her outta the country.
Certainly heard from a lot of councils who said to a lot,
which haven had expired consent or,
or about staff process of recon consenting.
And I said to all of 'em at that stage, Hey, look,
got new legislation, you will have a new
set of standards, et cetera.
Um, you know, you might want not embark on a,
on one journey, um, which is a very expensive journey
before you get another launch, you might
less, uh, less expensive.
Yeah. What do you seeing council doing in terms
of their thinking about that?
And have you actually noticed and actually
going, yeah, actually, hang on.
We want to push pause last year with the year before, um,
because we know something else is coming
and we know that we wanna be certain about what It's
that the environ we're operating in,
Look, I think the water services operators, so, you know,
they've, they've been highly engaged in reform discussions
for several years now, and,
and they got the signal and they got the message.
So, um, by
and large, we didn't see a whole lot
of resource consents rushed
through under the previous system in order
to pay a lot more, more than they needed to.
So, so, uh, and actually the legislation laid out a period
of transition, um, that allows, uh, those who are holding,
uh, an expired consent
or those who's about to expire, um, a three year period, um,
to, uh, uh, of, um, grace, if you like,
on the expired consent, um, which, which will close.
And then you need to be operating on a new consent against
the wastewater standard.
So, so we will shift a large part
of the public wastewater system onto a, a, a new modern,
standardized treatment expectation within the next
three or four years.
But the investment, that window also gives industry the
chance to standardize some of the treatment plant technology
that responds to it and bring the cost down. Yeah.
Um, we've got, um, less than 10 minutes left
now, but we'll go to Tangi
And then to Tabitha.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I'm just following up from Andy's question,
but more around the capability and resourcing.
So I get that the standards of there to protect, um,
public health and environmental outcomes, uh,
as regulator, you monitor that.
But where does the sort of, um, gaps around, uh,
technical expertise, funding, financing, all of those things
that might exist within the entity
that's actually causing an issue for them to be able
to perhaps adequately meet the standards?
Where does that sit in terms of the levers that you can or,
or more, what are the levers that are available to you?
And has, has there been any sort
of conversation at ministerial level around some
of these concerns if they have
habituated at this early stage?
If I may start, I think the minister
has been very supportive.
He has said to us that if we need more powers,
that we should bring that up with him.
We are very conscious of the fact
that there are many other agencies that have the powers,
so we can't duplicate the powers.
It's about making them more, more efficient.
But Alan can speak more about, uh, what is it
where we can, the authorizations.
The authorizations. So the authorizations
where we are saying, um, you need this caliber of trades,
tradespeople, and the legislation is quite open.
And I, my conversations internally has been we could start
all the way from those who govern coming down to those
who manage, to those who actually do the work. But you,
Just, before you answer that, you,
you touch on the, the powers aspect.
Have in light of that invitation from the minister,
have you thought about any potential next step powers
or changes that need to be made?
And if so, what are they,
Sarah?
Yeah, look, we, we've, um, pro probably it's, it's uh,
uh, things unfold.
Uh, those conversations are, are, are live.
So, so we know we've got economic regulation, um,
coming in under the Commerce Commission.
It's not in place yet.
They've got a draft regime out there
that's been consulted on, and they're looking to set it up.
So, um, uh, how seamlessly does that interact with our job,
which I would describe loosely as the stuff that comes
into and out of a pipe should be safe to drink
or should be well treated to discharge the pipe
and its condition in looking after.
It is the commerce commission's focus, if you like.
And obviously both of us have a,
have an interest in each other's, uh, work in that regard.
But we've got a new regime coming on that front in terms
of the environmental, um, uh, regulation
and the regional councils, which is where a lot
of the conversation today has been, uh, focused on.
Uh, we, we know that the frontline regulator sits there.
We know we have set the standards,
but we get to see how the system shifts
and transitions to them and,
and do we need additional powers?
We, we do have a few agencies.
We've got the EPA as as well who have the ability to, uh,
intervene or, or,
or reach in, uh,
to matters under the RMA if they feel the need
that they are justified and doing so, or there's a,
or something's not being attended.
That's a lot of active. So I, I would similar ference it
as live dialogue with the minister.
Um, and, and it's an ongoing part of our role to, to,
to observe and advise.
Can I just, you might have you finished? Yeah.
So you can go into primary.
Thank you, um, on that, uh, from
what I've been hearing from the public,
they want in reference to more point,
but not only about them, they want the public want them
to pay for the destruction that they've caused
or that have happened because of their operation.
So fines are a big conversation
and a big tool that you could use.
Um, my understanding is that the fines have been increased
for, um, this kind of, um, destruction.
But do, do the, do fines need to be bigger?
Do we need to be hitting people in the pocket?
So, so the penalties, uh, for, for an incident,
like my point will, will be under the RMA
and they're administered by the, the regional council,
but not, not ourselves.
Uh, we, we have a, we can issue fines
and penalties under our legislation for drinking water, but,
but the regime for that is not yet in place.
Uh, so, so we can't administer them.
I would observe though that the, um, uh,
there's a judgment that that takes place
for regional councils probably right now about the, the,
the imposition of those fines, uh, on, on, uh, rate payers
and, and the use of that money that could,
could be spent in the problem versus the fine.
And, and so that's a dilemma for,
For them. Yeah.
Okay. Alright.
So, um, so I have some questions now
about, uh, drinking water.
Um, what, what are the main area areas
of concern for you guys when it comes to, um, breaches
of human health limits for nitrate levels in, um,
freshwater Yeah. Drinking water.
So, look, I'll, I'll, um, I'll, I'll get Steve
to talk about, um, uh, our,
how we're seeing the drinking water, uh,
space, including nitrates.
What I would observe though at the outset,
because I know there's a lot of focus on nitrates, um, and,
and some concerns and in parts of the country around it, uh,
since we were stood up in 2021 and,
and we took on all those supplies, only two public, uh,
water supplies ha have, have notified us of, um, a, a breach
of the, the maximum allowable value for nitrate.
Uh, they were and, and gorgeous councils down south.
And, and, and I am aware of, uh, the reports, uh,
coming through about, uh, concerns in nitrates
and nitrate levels in a number of private water supplies.
Um, usually unregistered,
they might be lifestyle blocks, et cetera.
Those supplies tend to draw from reasonably shallow bores,
which are subject to contamination, possibly from nitrates,
but possibly from other sources too.
The public suppliers in the south island draw from deep
groundwater sources and in, in Canterbury from the aquifer.
And, and, uh,
that's a very different risk profile for the public.
So, so not a, not an issue from our perspective.
Uh, and not a trend either, uh, for the public supplies,
private supplies, we don't know.
They're not in the regime yet.
Mm-hmm. And, sorry, what's the role that, um, what,
how would you describe your role
when there are these breaches?
Because in the Gore situation, there was a lot
of finger pointing between the council
and, you know, who was responsible
for letting people know they were drinking.
Mm-hmm. You know, unsafe water.
So where, what's your role? So
To that, the other thing I came as well,
we we're a young regulator.
So one of the first requirements
that was put in place when we stood up was a requirement
to test source water and drinking water.
So the data that we have, despite the fact
that regional councils have had the obligation
of gathering this information for a number of years,
the information that relates directly
to drinking water is limited to the last three years.
So through that period, um, it's been reasonably static.
And as Alan notes, only two public supplies have had
exceedances the responsibility of the exceedance.
And our first priority is always public.
Let the public know what's the public interest,
what's the public health consequence.
So we've, uh, much of the work
that we are doing is communicating these issues,
making sure the public understands now with, um,
and go the responsibility.
They have the best channels of communicating contamination,
um, to their communities.
Uh, and the expectation as they do that, we can amplify.
We certainly wouldn't want, um,
to lose any opportunity if there's a public health
concern for people not to know.
Uh, and that's where we focus our effort.
Thank you. We have now, uh, run out of time, uh,
for hearing from you,
but thank you very much for engaging
with us today and for answering these
Questions. Thank you.